# Emotional deepening process
`May 5, 2024`

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://youtube.com/embed/kNRg2DFtgOw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[Emotional deepening process](https://youtube.com/watch?v=kNRg2DFtgOw), by [Robert Elliott](https://iseft.org/boardmembers)

Video uploaded: Jul 25, 2016

---

A recent development in EFT is the formulation of a model or sequence of emotional deepening processes, and this is an attempt to integrate some of the complexity of EFT. But the idea is basically that when we work, when a client comes to see us, they often present in a kind of regular sequence that we can follow with the client. It provides a kind of **roadmap** that runs across many kinds, many different kinds of EFT work.

And this sequence starts with the person presenting, the client presenting with an undifferentiated emotion. This is an emotion which is global and not distinct or specific, so the client might say I feel bad or I feel frustrated or I don't know what I feel. So that's an undifferentiated emotion state. It means there's no distinctions, it's just kind of a global feeling of badness, and the therapist helps the client to specify and **differentiate** to sort out that different what kind of bad it is that they feel.

So then it moves to a slightly deeper kind of emotion response, and that's typically a **secondary reactive emotion**. That's an emotion which is a reaction to another emotion that came before it, and this secondary process is also often the symptoms that clients bring to therapy. You know whether they're depressed or anxious or having post-trauma difficulties or what-have-you. So the presenting problems that clients bring, their symptoms are often secondary reactive emotions, and these emotions don't help them deal with their situations. They tend to get stuck in them and going round and round in circles, and so the therapist gives the client, gives this emotion the secondary emotion empathy. They offered empathy because **in EFT you cannot leave an emotion before you arrive at it, even if it's a secondary reactive emotion**, so it gets empathy, but the therapist is listening and helping the client listen to what underneath what came before this symptomatic emotion.

So, client might come to me with social anxiety or something which is a secondary reactive emotion, and so then the therapist and client begin to listen for what came before that presenting secondary emotion, and that will typically go to, **it could be another secondary emotion** that something else comes before **or it could be a primary maladaptive emotion**. That's an emotion which is an old bad stuck emotion which doesn't fit the situation anymore, and the person's overreacting to. So these primary maladaptive emotions people also get stuck in and they go round and round in circles. So, you know, with someone with social anxiety, that would be a sense of shame or defectiveness or shame about their defectiveness, and then the secondary emotion is going to be the fear of the shame that comes after that.

So then we're **working with this primary maladaptive emotion**, which is the client's first reaction to a situation, so nothing came before it, but it's more about things that have happened to the person in the past. So, it's an old bad familiar feeling that no longer fits the current situation, and so it's not useful to them, and people do get stuck in these. So the therapist and client work with this, and again the client has **to arrive at this emotion, fully experience the sense of shame or brokenness**, for example in the case of social anxiety, and then there's a kind of deepening process.

And one of the reasons, part of this emerging model in EFT, is the idea that **we help the client to identify in the primary maladaptive emotion their core pain**. That's the thing that hurts the most, that the thing at the deepest level of them feels most painful or difficult for them, that they struggle with, and it's often a sense of being broken, a sense of being lost and lonely and abandoned, feeling unlovable. And this core pain, then, what we do in EFT therapy, we then say what is that pain need, **what is that pain need?** So remember, we, you know, I've been talking about how part of the value of emotions as they point to needs or wants and the needs and wants point to other things.

So if the core pain we say what is this sense of brokenness or this lost lonely child part of you or this sense of being so defective, what does this need? And the client then says, the client sort of at the bottom of their process here, and the client says well you know I just need someone to be there to validate me or I need someone to protect me from harm or need, you know, my socially anxious clients, it's often, I just need someone to acknowledge and look at me, to be able to look at me in the face and acknowledge my existence. And so **the core pain has these unmet needs associated with it**, and as the client begins to access the core pain and the unmet needs that they point to we then say okay, so what would meet that need? And **the thing that would meet that need is a different emotion**.

So with a sense of being exposed and vulnerable, it would be **protective anger**. With a sense of being unlovable and alone and abandoned, it would be **compassion or love**, and so there's another emotion that's implicit in the unmet need that's comes out of the core pain. And so what happens is the client basically **bridges from the primary maladaptive emotion to an adaptive emotion through this, the unmet need** associated with the core pain, and we have a kind of, set of kind of slogans so we say, you know, the primary adaptive emotions that we're helping our clients to access in therapy tend to be protective anger, that's the anger that protects; that's connecting sadness, so that's the sadness that connects and that's like with my socially anxious clients that's the hunger for human contact and that sadness of missing out on being with other people and being close to other people so he had this; this is a protective anger that's particularly useful for trauma.

We have protective sadness, oh sorry, **connecting sadness** that's more for, say, something like social anxiety or depression, the sadness that connects. And then there's self-compassion. We often help the client access a part of them that loves and cares and protects and supports the part that's feeling so wounded and injured, so we help the client access in themselves these, the self-compassion, and **that self-compassion is going to transform that, the stuck primary maladaptive emotion**. And there are other emotions too, there's love, there's curiosity, there's humor and these different emotions are all emotions that we help our clients to access their primary adaptive emotions that fit the current situation and they help the clients to transform the primary maladaptive emotion.
