# Best way to save your chat history with ChatGPT
`January 23, 2025`

I use ChatGPT in a minimalist, low-key way, without logging into the system. That is, I simply [start a new temporary chat](https://chatgpt.com/?temporary-chat=true) each time.

> Temporary Chat  
> This chat won't appear in history or be used to train our models. For safety purposes, we may keep a copy of this chat for up to 30 days.

However, I’d like to save my conversations for future reference. Previously, I used a browser screenshot extension, namely `Awesome Screen Recorder & Screenshot`, to do so.

I’ve now discovered a better solution, which, as I understand it, is the best way to save/export chat history: using the browser extension [SingleFile](https://github.com/gildas-lormeau/SingleFile).

There’s a demo video on the page above. You can install the browser extension for Chromium/Chrome [here](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/singlefile/mpiodijhokgodhhofbcjdecpffjipkle). If you're using a different browser, refer to [the "Install" section of the page](https://github.com/gildas-lormeau/SingleFile?tab=readme-ov-file#install).

Although it's possible to save the webpage with ChatGPT as an .mhtml file by using "Save Page As..." in Chromium/Chrome and selecting "Webpage, Single File" as the format, the resulting .mhtml file is usually much larger than the file generated by the `SingleFile` extension.

Additionally, the .mhtml file embeds images as base64 data within the file. In contrast, when you configure `SingleFile` like this: <span style="border-bottom:1.5px solid; border-bottom-color:#f55066;">Options → File format → self-extracting ZIP (universal)</span>, the resulting ZIP package from `SingleFile` can be extracted, and the images are preserved in their original format.

## References
- [UnGoogled Chromium browser with extensions](/o/s.htm?p=ungoogled)
